---
layout: post
title: "Money"
date: 2009-11-08T12:00:00Z
---
Most of what we do nowadays involves money.  Once upon a time, we used
to barter, but now almost always use money.  When you go to the
doctor, you give him cash, not some bread or meat.  We give alms to
the poor in the form of donations to charities.  Food banks do not
take left over scraps of food any more.  You have to give sealed
packages of specific types of food, which are purchased at a grocery
store.

The reason money is has become such a central part of our lives is
that it is simple.  Money lets people understand the value of goods
and services in an easy way.  You know that a gallon of milk and gas
are about the same price.  You know what you earn in dollars, and
therefore you can figure out how many gallons of milk you could buy
with your paycheck.  It's all just simple arithmetic.  Something we
learned in elementary school.  If Mary has three dollars and an
apple costs fifty cents, how many apples can Mary buy?

Yet money is terrifying to many people.  The word "finance" can send
people screaming from the room or cause them to fall into a stupor.
To me this is a tragedy, in the traditional meaning of the word:
if you hide from basic economics, you will be lorded over by people
who claim to know about finance.  It's no different than a shaman
(aka. medicine man or women) controlling your access to the spirit
world and therefore your health.  As we know shamans had no special
powers.  It was all a mirage.  The same is true about money people.
They are fakes, and have no special powers over money.

If you care about your family and future, you need to learn about
money.  Finance is much less complicated than communicating with the
spirit world.  You do not need rattles, herbs, special rituals.  All
you need is a simple calculator which can add, subtract, multiply, and
divide.

## The Four Concepts

Money people love inventing new terms.  Like shamans, the more names
for a thing they have, the more confusing it is for outsiders.  As we
have seen recently, new terms like the now infamous "credit default
swaps", do not change the nature of finance.  They are designed to
hide the fact that money flows two ways: in and out.   If you have
more money going out than coming in, you go bankrupt as Bear Stearns
and AIG did.

The inflows and outflows are divided into four concepts: revenues,
expenses, investments, and other people's money.  The differences
between these terms are easy to understand.  I'll go through them one
at a time, and then summarize their relationship.  I'm not trying to
teach you how to make more money.  My goal is to lay the economic
foundation needed to understand investing, which I'll discuss in
another article (to be written).

## Expenses

An expense is money you spend which you do not expect to get back.
Food, clothes, rent, and entertainment are expenses.  Interest on your
mortgage is an expense, too.  The $10,000 in taxes per person we paid
to support Wall Street firms is an expense.  We do not expect Wall
Street to pay us back.  If they do pay us back, it will only be part
of what we gave them.  Gambling in Las Vegas is an expense.  You are
guaranteed to get back 97% (or whatever), but that means the 3% you
lose on average is an expense.

## Revenues

Revenues are the opposite of expenses.  When you pay an expense,
someone is earning revenue.  Your paycheck is revenue to you and an
expense to your employer.  If you sell some junk on craigslist, it is
revenue.  If you bought a couch it was an expense at the time of
purchase.  If you sell it later, it is revenue.  The same is true for
cars, jewelry, investment education seminars, etc.  Some people might
call these invesments, but they aren't.  The next section expains why.

## Investments

When money leaves your wallet and you expect it to come back plus a
little bit more, you have just made an investment.  Of all the things
most people buy, a house is probably the only investment, and some
might argue it is simply a luxury the finance industry wants you to
think is an investment.  Certainly, the many people during the recent
financial crisis who owe more than they paid on their houses are not
thinking of them as investments now.  You may get *some* of your money
back when you sell your car, but you will not get all of it back.  If
you add in the expenses required to maintain your alleged automotive
invesment, such as parts, labor, taxes, and insurance, it is even more
clear that you get less back than you put in.

The golden rule of money is:


> revenues minus expenses equals profit or loss


If you spend more than you bring in, you are losing.  This is what
happened to many companies and families in the recent past.  No one
escapes the golden rule of money.  It is a law you can bank on just
like gravity.

## Other People's Money (OPM)

The main reason so many people lost money recently is that they
confused other people's money (OPM) from their own.  Finance people
love OPM.  Bernie Madoff loved OPM but was as confused as Joe the
Plumber about what was his and what was theirs.

OPM is an investment to the other people in OPM, and these people can
be divided into four categories: family, friends, fools, and
investors.  In the business, people talk about FFF money.  I like to
include the four category (investors), because they do exist, and
[it is wise to pay attention to them](/2009/06/13/Objectively-Rich.html).  Warren Buffet is an investor and the second richest
man in the world.  The fact that he is so wealthy is no accident.

Most people who supply OPM are one of the FFFs.  They loan money to
family when they are in need.  Friends stump up for other friends.
And, fools give their money to people like Bernie Madoff, AIG, Bear
Stearns, Country-Wide Insurance, WebVan, and a host of other
companies run by charlatans.

OPM is the flip side of investments, just like revenues and expenses
reflect each other.  Every dollar you spend is a dollar of revenue for
somebody else.  Every time someone invests money, it turns into OPM
for a company or person.  The difference between OPM and revenue is
that OPM has to be paid back, one way or the other, or you will end up
in jail like Bernie Madoff or bankrupt like Bear Sterns.

## OPM is good

People love OPM, and it is what makes most of the world go around.
From Grameem Bank in Bangladesh to Kleiner Perkins in Silicon Valley,
OPM is a force for good in this world.  I bought my house with a
mortgage.  People invested in my business.  I have lived a good life
thanks to OPM.  Conversely, the bank(s) which loaned me money for my
house has earned hundreds of thousands of dollars from their
investment.

Time is money.  Bernie Madoff burned through the money over time.  If
he had enough time, no one would have caught him.  The financial
institutions which got caught in the financial crisis simply ran out
of time on their OPM.  Patience is not the strong suit of most
investors.  The crisis was caused by people panicking on both sides of
the investment/OPM equation.  That's too bad, and great investors,
like Warren Buffet, will be making fat returns on the investments they
are making now for many years to come.

## Koyaanisqatsi

We are in a time of imbalances.  The Hopis called this Koyaanisqatsi.
The golden rule of money will not change.  The financial system is not
out of balance, it is the same as it always was.  Money does not grow
on trees nor fall from heaven.  The four concepts I have explained are
the constants in our world.  You can use them to explain any financial
situation.  Once you start taking apart the terms the Shamans of Wall
Street come up with, you'll see that there is just a man behind the
curtain pulling levers.  The question I leave leave you with is: do
you want to submit to the man behind the curtain, or do you want to be
the person pulling the levers?

