---
layout: post
title: "BookNotes: Fluke: The Math and Myth of Coincidence"
date: 2019-02-15T14:00:00Z
---
By Joseph Mazur, Basic Books, March 29, 2016, 0465060951

The law of large numbers is something difficult to grasp. Joseph
Mazur's insightful book will help you understand why coincidences are
a common occurrence. Mazur says we should think more about flukes than
coincidences, because coincidences imply causality (surprise) and
flukes don't. Flukes just happen, because we live in a world of large
numbers of people who are tightly clustered in space and time.

We love hearing the story about how we ran into a friend whom we knew
in Palo Alto years earlier in an elevator at Zurich airport. It just
so happens we have lots of friends, and our friends have lots of
friends, and we're likely to hear a story like this. Mazur presents us
with some really compelling coincidences that imply causality but are
really just random events that are bound to happen in somebody's life.

The rest of the book is about probabilities: their history and how
thei work. While I'm not a math person, I understood them quite
well. I think most people would given some patience.

Fluke is a fun and interesting book that challenges us to not jump to
conclusions. We're story makers and lovers. Our brain wants
explanations. Unfortunately, coincidences are just flukes that make us
feel good, because our minds also love surprises.

I happened to find something yesterday that I had been looking for
since we finished our renovation about seven months ago. It was a
fluke that I happened to look in the back of a closet (something fell
behind a shelf), but it was a nice surprise to find what I was missing
and had been wondering about for months. The dopamine rush was great,
but that's all it was: a neurochemical surge. It's cheaper and safer
than cocaine but just as addicting. I enjoyed the surprise with the
knowledge that I didn't need to make up a story about why I found
it. The fact that I'm writing about this particular book that I
finished about seven months ago when I originally lost the things
(some spices, if you must know) is also just another happy
coincidence, and nothing more. Sitting with that emotion for me is
very pleasant.

I hope you enjoy your next coincidence as well!

> [k122] Coincidences make magnificent stories.

> [k1794] Hidden variables are ubiquitous in statistical data
> correlation. Without spotting those variables we are bound to
> mistakenly believe all sorts of nonsense such as to get good college
> grades one should start smoking because "cigarette smokers make
> higher college grades than nonsmokers."

> [k1879] The job of statistics is not to find causes, but rather to
> find suspects.

> [k1896] COINCIDENCES ARE DISTINGUISHED stories that arouse our
> attention to probability.

> [k2598] These were the scientific discoveries of unusual people, who
> by some unaccountable luck met timely flukes and coincidences and
> wisely recognized them as clues to the answers of big
> questions. They show us that unplanned happenings can be as useful
> to discovery as purposeful hypotheses.

> [k3186] we tend to suspend belief in reason so as to enter a world
> that is not our own, an illusory world where we are the ghostly
> observers of events that tell us something about ourselves as
> humans. Like most fictional accounts, the stories here, with their
> embedded flukes and coincidences, show us who we really are as
> archetypes in the big picture.
>
> "A certain man once lost a diamond cuff-link in the wide blue sea,"
> Vladimir Nabokov wrote in his novel Laughter in the Dark, "and
> twenty years later, on the exact day, a Friday apparently, he was
> eating a large fish--but there was no diamond inside. That's what I
> like about coincidence."

> [k3462] Rather, those laws are statistically narrative, giving
> credence to the idea that improbable things are bound to happen more
> frequently than we would expect. For instance, the collection
> contains what Hand calls the law of inevitability, which tells us
> "if you make a complete list of all possible outcomes, then one of
> them must occur."
