---
layout: post
title: "BookNotes: Genius: The Life and Science of Richard Feynman"
date: 2020-04-13T13:00:00Z
---
By James Gleick, Open Road Media, February 22, 2011, 0679747044

I didn't finish this book (only 20% read). It's well written, but I
found it pretty tough going after a while. I had read Surely You're
Joking, Mr Feynman! so I know some of Feynman's history. The books
overlap, but Genius is written for someone who wants to understand
Feynman's physics. Surely You're Joking is written more tongue and
cheek and by a self-promoter (something that is claimed in Genius).

The ideas about physics were impenetrable. There are no equations,
just prose that I have no intuition to understand. I didn't do well in
physics in college, and I don't think I'm going to pick it up now --
despite having spent 6 years working at a company that does physics.
Again, the book is well-written so if you liked Chaos (didn't read
it either), I bet you'd like this.

Feynman's life is very interesting to me, because he grew up in Far
Rockaway, which is near where I grew up. He had a Jewish upbringing as
did I. So, I identified a lot with his family life, and yet our lives
were so very different that the story is intriguing.

I enjoyed the beginning of the book. Perhaps I should skip ahead of
the impenetrable physics to see if there's more interesting bits.

> [k438] They shared a sense that science, as a profession, rewarded merit.
> In fact, the best colleges and universities continued to raise barriers
> against Jewish applicants, and their science faculties remained
> determinedly Protestant, until after World War II.

> [k441] As a town Far Rockaway had a center that even Cedarhurst lacked.
> When Richard's mother, Lucille, walking down to Central Avenue, headed
> for stores like Nebenzahl's and Stark's, she appreciated the
> centralization.

> [k444] This village looked inward as carefully as the shtetl that
> remained in some memories. There was a consistency of belief and
> behavior. To be honest, to be principled, to study, to save money against
> hard times--the rules were not so much taught as assumed. Everyone worked
> hard.

> [k448] "That was the way the world was," Feynman said long afterward.
> "But now I realize that everybody was struggling like mad. Everybody was
> struggling and it didn't seem like a struggle." For children, life in
> such neighborhoods brought a rare childhood combination of freedom and
> moral rigor.

> [k519] If his mother's bridge partners asked how she could tolerate the
> noise, or the chemical smoke, or the not-so-invisible ink on the good
> linen hand towels, she said calmly that it was worth it. There were no
> second thoughts in the middle-class Jewish families of New York about the
> value of ambition on the children's behalf.

> [k533] Melville Feynman placed a high value on curiosity and a low value
> on outward appearances. He wanted Richard to mistrust jargon and
> uniforms; as a salesman, he said, he saw the uniforms empty. The pope
> himself was just a man in a uniform.

> [k535] He favored process over facts.

> [k885] He turned on the set, and the noise had vanished. The boy who
> fixes radios by thinking--that was how he saw himself, reflected in the
> eyes of his customers in Far Rockaway. Reason worked. Equations could be
> trusted; they were more than schoolbook exercises.

> [k898] The currency of scientific information had not yet been devalued
> by excess. For a young student, that meant that the most timely questions
> were surprisingly close to hand. Feynman recognized early the special,
> distinctive feeling of being close to the edge of knowledge, where people
> do not know the answers.

> [k1014] When Slater arrived, the MIT department sustained barely a dozen
> graduate students. Six years later, the number had increased to sixty.
> Despite the Depression the institute had completed a new physics and
> chemistry laboratory with money from the industrialist George Eastman.
> Major research programs had begun in the laboratory fields devoted to
> using electromagnetic radiation as a probe into the structure of matter:
> especially spectroscopy, analyzing the signature frequencies of light
> shining from different substances, but also X-ray crystallography. (Each
> time physicists found a new kind of "ray" or particle,

> [k1044] Stratton, handling the teaching chores for the first semester,
> would sometimes lose the thread of a string of equations at the
> blackboard, the color of his face shifting perceptibly toward red. He
> would then pass the chalk, saying, "Mr. Feynman, how did you handle this
> problem," and Feynman would stride to the blackboard.

> [k1254] Philosophy at MIT only irritated Feynman more. It struck him as
> an industry built by incompetent logicians.

> [k1261] MIT's physics instructors did nothing to encourage students to
> pay attention to the philosophy instructors. The tone was set by the
> pragmatic Slater, for whom philosophy was smoke and perfume,
> free-floating and untestable prejudice. Philosophy set knowledge adrift;
> physics anchored knowledge to reality.

> [k1373] With guidance from just a few texts they embarked on a program of
> self-study. Their collaboration began in one of the upstairs study rooms
> of the Bay State Road fraternity house and continued past the end of the
> spring term. Feynman returned home to Far Rockaway, Welton to Saratoga
> Springs. They filled a notebook, mailing it back and forth, and in a
> period of months they recapitulated nearly the full sweep of the 1925--27
> revolution.

> [k1440] MIT was still an engineering school, and an engineering school in
> the heyday of mechanical ingenuity.

> [k1587] The case against Jews rarely had to be articulated. It was
> understood that their striving, their pushiness, smelled of the tenement.
> It was unseemly. "They took obvious pride in their academic success....
> We despised the industry of those little Jews," a Harvard Protestant
> wrote in 1920. Thomas Wolfe, himself despising the ambition of "the Jew
> boy," nevertheless understood the attraction of the scientific career:
> "Because, brother, he is burning in the night.

> [k1597] Princeton did accept him, and from then on he never had occasion
> to worry about the contingencies of academic hiring. Still, when he was
> at MIT, the Bell Telephone Laboratories turned him down for summer jobs
> year after year, despite recommendations by William Shockley, Bell's
> future Nobel laureate. Bell was an institution that hired virtually no
> Jewish scientists before the war.

> [k1782] No other college so keenly delineated the social status of its
> undergraduates as Princeton did with its club system. Although the
> twentieth century had begun to intrude--the graduate departments were
> growing in stature, and Nassau Street had been paved--Princeton before
> the war remained, as F. Scott Fitzgerald described it adoringly a
> generation earlier, "lazy and good-looking and aristocratic," an outpost
> for New York, Philadelphia, and Southern society.


> [k1787] Even the kindly genius who became the town's most famous
> resident on arriving in 1933 could not resist a gibe: "A quaint
> ceremonious village," Einstein wrote, "of puny demigods on stilts."

> [k1851] As Dirac recognized, however, in concluding his Principles of
> Quantum Mechanics, the electron's infinities meant that the theory was
> mortally flawed.

> [k2393] In preparing for his oral qualifying examination, a rite of
> passage for every graduate student, he chose not to study the outlines of
> known physics. Instead he went up to MIT, where he could be alone, and
> opened a fresh notebook. On the title page he wrote: Notebook Of Things I
> Don't Know About.
