---
layout: post
title: "BookNotes: Can't Even: How Millennials Became the Burnout Generation"
date: 2021-02-03T17:00:00Z
---
By Anne Helen Petersen, Mariner Books, September 22, 2020, 0358315077

I enjoyed Can't Even at first, then I kind of got sick of it. I did not
feel the millennial characterizations were spot on, at least not from
my perspective. I would rather say that her experience was unique
to Silicon Valley startup culture. The millennials I know in Boulder,
who work in tech, do not have the same issues that Anne Helen Petersen
had. I could relate to her issues as a former Silicon Valley startup
person.

There's a lot of interesting cultural aspects in the book which make
it a worthwhile read if you'd like to learn about the effects of, say,
hyperactive social media use.

Can't Even is fast past and an easy read.

> [k77] Maybe all we need to act on that feeling is an irrefutable pivot
> point: an opportunity not just for reflection, but to build a different
> design, a different way of life, from the rubble and clarity brought
> forth by this pandemic. I'm not talking about utopia, per se. I'm talking
> about a different way of thinking about work, and personal value, and
> profit incentives--and the radical idea that each of us matter, and are
> __actually__ essential and worthy of care and protection.

> [k80] If you think that's too radical of an idea, I don't know how to
> make you care about other people.

> [k104] When my editor suggested I was burning out, I balked: Like other
> type-A overachievers, I didn't hit walls, I worked around them.

> [k117] As one piece put it, "The modern Millennial, for the most part,
> views adulthood as a series of actions, as opposed to a state of being.
> Adulting therefore becomes a verb."

> [k124] Adulting--and, by extension, completing your to-do list--is hard,
> then, because living in the modern world is somehow both easier than it's
> ever been and yet unfathomably complicated.

> [k133] I couldn't shake the feeling of precariousness--that all that I'd
> worked for could just disappear--or reconcile it with an idea that had
> surrounded me since I was a child: that if I just worked hard enough,
> everything would pan out.

> [k153] When you're in the midst of burnout, the feeling of accomplishment
> that follows an exhausting task--passing the final! finishing the massive
> work project!--never comes.

> [k169] Burnout has become so pervasive that in May 2019, the World Health
> Organization officially recognized it as an "occupational phenomenon,"
> resulting from "chronic workplace stress that has not been successfully
> managed."

> [k178] We're balancing skyrocketing housing prices and childcare costs
> and health insurance premiums.

> [k198] We were raised to believe that if we worked hard enough, we could
> win the system--of American capitalism and meritocracy--or at least live
> comfortably within it. But something happened in the late 2010s. We
> looked up from our work and realized, there's no winning the system when
> the system itself is broken.

> [k200] We're the first generation since the Great Depression where many
> of us will find ourselves worse off than our parents.

> [k202] We're drowning in student debt--an estimated $37,000 per
> debtor--that's permanently stunted our financial lives.

> [k222] People from other generations have been burnt out; that's not a
> question. Burnout, after all, is a symptom of living in our modern
> capitalist society.

> [k223] And in many ways, our hardships pale in comparison. We did not
> weather a Great Depression, or the catastrophic loss of life that
> accompanied a world war.

> [k230] For millennials, burnout is foundational: the best way to describe
> who we've been raised to be, how we interact with and think about the
> world, and our everyday experience thereof. And it isn't an isolated
> experience. It's our base temperature.

> [k258] I find myself returning to the words of Tiana Clark, who wrote a
> piece on the specifics of Black burnout in response to my own: "No matter
> the movement or era," she wrote, "being burned out has been the steady
> state of black people in this country for hundreds of years."

> [k287] What we talk about when we talk about millennials, then, depends
> on who's doing the talking.

> [k288] This book cannot fully cover any version of the millennial
> experience, including the white middle-class one.

> [k289] That's not an abdication of responsibility, but an
> acknowledgment: This is the start of the conversation, and an invitation
> to talk more. There's no burnout Olympics.

> [k293] But one thing did become incredibly clear: This isn't a personal
> problem. It's a societal one--and it will not be cured by productivity
> apps, or a bullet journal, or face mask skin treatments, or overnight
> fucking oats.

> [k303] "You think you're burnt out? Try surviving the Great Depression
> and World War II!" In the wake of the millennial burnout piece, that was
> the most common critique in my inbox. The sentiment usually came from
> boomers, who, somewhat ironically, had endured neither the Great
> Depression nor World War II.

> [k311] In truth, millennials are boomers' worst nightmare because, in
> many cases, we were once their most well-intentioned dream.

> [k316] What we could do was roast them online using memes. "Old Economy
> Steve" first appeared on Reddit in 2012, pairing a 1970s high school
> portrait with a caption suggesting he's now your market-loving dad who
> won't shut up about how you should really start putting money into your
> 401k.

> [k318] Subsequent iterations narrativized his economic privilege:
> DRIVES UP FEDERAL DEFICIT FOR 30 YEARS / HANDS THE BILL TO HIS KIDS, one
> version of the meme exclaims; "WHEN I WAS IN COLLEGE MY SUMMER JOB PAID
> THE TUITION" / TUITION WAS $400 says another.

> [k332] As the comedian Dan Sheehan put it in 2019, in a tweet that's been
> liked more than 200,000 times, "Baby Boomers did that thing where you
> leave a single square of toilet paper on the roll and pretend it's not
> your turn to change it, but with a whole society."

> [k339] Boomers were anxious and overworked and deeply resentful of the
> critiques levied at them. The problem, and why it's often hard to think
> of them charitably, is their inability to tap that experience in order to
> empathize with their own children's generation.

> [k415] To these critics, whose generation had weathered the deprivations
> of the Great Depression and World War II, these boomers were simply
> ungrateful.

> [k499] But the myth of the wholly self-made American, like all myths,
> relies on some sort of sustained willful ignorance--often perpetuated by
> those who've already benefited from them.

> [k512] As Maurice A. St. Pierre, writing in the Journal of Black Studies,
> explained in 1993, "The policies of the Reagan administration--based on
> the philosophy of hard work, independence, thrift, minimum government
> intervention in the lives of citizens, and making America strong
> again--affected the poor, many of whom are Black, more negatively than
> the economically better-off."

> [k566] For yuppies to keep treading water, others had to sink below the
> surface--economic casualties of yuppies' on-the-job actions as
> stockbrokers, consultants, and corporate lawyers.

> [k633] But the common denominator between experiences remains the same:
> to "succeed," as a millennial kid, at least according to middle-class
> societal standards, was to build yourself for burnout.

> [k635] The tenets of concerted cultivation will sound familiar, because
> they're what have been represented, and tacitly agreed upon, as "good"
> parenting for the last three decades.

> [k638] Baby food should be homemade; toddler play should be enriching;
> private tutors should be enlisted if necessary.

> [k641] Every part of a child's life, in other words, can be optimized to
> better prepare them for their eventual entry into the working world. They
> become mini-adults, with the attendant anxiety and expectations, years
> before adulthood hits. Concerted cultivation is, at its heart, a
> middle-class practice.

> [k735] "Risk management used to be a business practice," Malcolm Harris
> writes in Kids These Days: Human Capital and the Making of Millennials.
> "Now it's our dominant child-rearing strategy."

> [k948] That pressure to achieve wouldn't have existed without the notion
> that college, no matter the cost, would provide a path to middle-class
> prosperity and stability. But as millions of overeducated, underemployed,
> and student-debt-laden millennials will tell you, just because everyone
> around you believes in the gospel doesn't mean it's necessarily true.

> [k992] When one's value depends on the capacity to work, people who are
> disabled or elderly, people who cannot labor full-time or who provide
> care in ways that aren't paid at all or valued as highly--all become
> "less than" in the larger societal equation. And as much as we like to
> believe in a society where a person's value is found in the strength of
> their character, or the magnitude of their service and kindness to
> others, it's difficult to even type that sentence without being
> confronted with how little it reflects our current reality.

> [k1084] "When As are expected, there's no way to exceed expectations,"
> Meghan, who grew up in the Portland suburbs, told me.

> [k1100] But the overarching narrative, internalized amongst these
> middle-class and middle-class--aspirational teens, was the same: Optimize
> yourself into a college-application robot.

> [k1113] And then there's the creeping disillusionment that none of it
> really mattered, not then, and not now.

> [k1129] If you need a good resume to get into college, and the resume is
> filled with accomplishments that are largely hollow--then what,
> ultimately, is college for?

> [k1140] First, there are still many high-paying jobs that don't require a
> traditional four-year degree: HVAC installers, pipe fitters,
> electricians, and other construction trades, especially union ones, offer
> relatively stable middle-class standards of living.

> [k1195] But for the vast majority of millennials, getting a degree hasn't
> yielded the middle-class stability that was promised to both us and our
> parents. It's just the same thing it always was, even when it gets
> dressed up in the fancy robes of the education gospel: more work.

> [k1215] The rhetoric of "Do you what you love, and you'll never work
> another day in your life" is a burnout trap. By cloaking the labor in the
> language of "passion," we're prevented from thinking of what we do as
> what it is: a job, not the entirety of our lives.

> [k1232] As the artist Adam J. Kurtz rewrote the DWYL maxim on Twitter:
> "Do what you love and you'll never work a day in your life work super
> fucking hard all the time with no separation and no boundaries and also
> take everything extremely personally."

> [k1244] The desirability of "lovable" jobs is part of what makes them so
> unsustainable: So many people are competing for so few positions that
> compensation standards can be continuously lowered with little effect.

> [k1370] "If I learned anything in that search, it was that networking,
> nepotism, and insider connections are largely the only way to get a job,"
> she said. "And even then, that job was an unpaid internship."

> [k1405] But as he continues to seek--and fails to find--work as a pastor,
> he finds himself cycling between anxiety and shame and depression, and
> all of it bumping up against the sense of "calling."

> [k1414] The promise of hope labor is that if you can just make it in the
> door, it doesn't matter how you or other hope laborers are treated. What
> matters is that there's a chance that you'll end up doing what you love,
> however poorly paid you will be.

> [k1424] Initially, she was ashamed--this was 2008, and, at least in her
> town, the broad effects of the recession had yet to manifest. But in
> time, nearly everyone from her class who didn't go into STEM, or find
> their way to grad school, had also moved home.

> [k1436] See especially academia, which has effectively become a hope
> labor industrial complex.

> [k1456] "We were supposed to accept the status quo because we were doing
> good," Erin recalls. "When I quit teaching to work in tech--because I was
> literally starving!--I felt judged by my former colleagues."

> [k1461] What matters is that they spent a decade or more of their lives
> working toward what they loved--and failed to reach the finish line.
> That's what happens when we don't talk about work as work, but as
> pursuing a passion.

> [k1483] The fetishization of lovable work means that plain old
> jobs--non-ninja, non-Jedi jobs that might not be "cool" but that
> nonetheless offer magical powers like "stability" and "benefits"--come to
> feel undesirable. Within this logic, mailmen and electrician seem like
> our grandparents' and parents' jobs, the sorts of jobs with a definable
> start and ending, the sort of jobs that don't subsume the worker's
> identity.

> [k1502] Millions of millennials, regardless of class, were reared on
> lofty, romantic, bourgeois ideas of work. Eschewing those ideas means
> embracing ones that have never disappeared for many working-class
> employees: A good job is one that doesn't exploit you and that you don't
> hate.

> [k1543] Millennials did not germinate the idea that 'lovable work' was
> the ideal, nor did we cultivate it. But we did have to deal with the
> reality of just how frail that idea became once exposed to the real
> world.

> [k1563] But the new millennial refrain of "Fuck passion, pay me" feels
> more persuasive and powerful every day.

> [k1589] Above all, precariat workers are exhausted--and, regardless of
> the specifics of their job, burnt out.

> [k1704] "A lot of people assume Amazon or Walmart killed Toys "R" Us, but
> it was selling massive numbers of toys until the very end," the
> anti-monopoly activist Matt Stoller writes. "What destroyed the company
> were financiers, and public policies that allowed the divorcing of
> ownership from responsibility."

> [k1717] This is the paradigm shift that's so hard to confront: that in
> the current iteration of capitalism, fueled by Wall Street and private
> equity, the vast majority of employees do not benefit, in any way, from
> the profits that the company creates for its shareholders

> [k1720] This shift in financial goals--from long-term, gradual, stable
> profits to short-term spikes in stock price--helped create the
> increasingly shitty and alienated workplace we now know.

> [k1846] Bad jobs and the burnout that accompanies them are not the only
> option. Unions and regulation that address the realities of the changed
> economy will help.

> [k2013] The ideology of overwork has become so pernicious, so pervasive,
> that we attribute its conditions to our own failures, our own ignorance
> of the right life hack that will suddenly make everything easier. That's
> why books like Grit and Unf*ck Yourself and other titles with asterisks
> to blunt the profanity and the frustration have become such massive
> bestsellers: They suggest that the fix is right there, within our grasp.
> Because the problem, these books suggest, isn't the current economic
> system, or the companies that exploit and profit from it. It's us.

> [k2223] This work was framed as particularly suitable for supposedly
> self-centered, picky, self-righteous millennials; as the gig economy grew
> in visibility, Forbes declared, "The 9 to 5 job may soon be a relic of
> the past, if millennials have their way."

> [k2232] The gig economy isn't replacing the traditional economy. It's
> propping it up in a way that convinces people it's not broken.

> [k2233] Freelance and gigging don't make drudgery or anxiety disappear.
> Instead, they exacerbate them.

> [k2238] Jane, a freelance writer, explains that "there is such a sense in
> freelancing that you are never doing enough--that you should be doing
> more, making more, hustling more--and that every failure you have (real
> or perceived) is entirely your fault. In an office job, you're still
> getting paid for those five minutes it takes to make a cup of tea; when
> you're freelancing, every minute you're not working, you're losing
> money."

> [k2265] If lawmakers force companies like Uber to stop misclassifying its
> employees as independent contractors, it would reinforce the social
> contract between companies and laborers--the idea that companies are
> responsible for the livelihoods of those who labor for them, and that the
> profits gleaned through this labor should trickle down, in some form, to
> them.

> [k2318] I'm equally ashamed and exhausted writing that description of a
> pretty standard day in my digital life--and it doesn't even include all
> of the additional times I looked at my phone, or checked social media, or
> went back and forth between a draft and the internet, as I did twice just
> while writing this sentence. In the United States, one 2013 study found
> that millennials check their phone 150 times day; a different 2016 study
> claimed we log an average of six hours and nineteen minutes of scrolling
> and texting and stressing out over emails per week. No one I know likes
> their phone.

> [k2339] Like so many aspects of burnout, digital exhaustion isn't unique
> to millennials. But our generation has a relationship with digital
> technologies that, at least in this moment, is uniquely aggravating.

> [k2349] Twitter took off and largely demolished the blogging world.

> [k2380] But the addition of the Like button--and changing the "alerts"
> from blue to red, so that people couldn't ignore them--incentivized
> repeated, obsessive returns to the site.

> [k2469] I do spend a lot of time outdoors with my dogs, and I do spend a
> lot of time traveling for my job. But I post the outdoor pictures to try
> to prove to myself and others that the bulk of my Montana life isn't
> spent behind a computer, and the other shots are to convince myself and
> others that constant travel isn't an alienating slog, but a thrill.

> [k2479] We might not curate our "squares" as ruthlessly as Gen Z--who
> often keep just a handful of photos posted at a time--but most of us
> think about how often to post, when something's "story" content versus
> when it's a post, how much photo editing is acceptable and how much is
> too obvious.

> [k2496] When I have fifteen minutes before bed and I'm exhausted, I know
> the best thing to ease myself into rest is reading a book. But just
> making that choice to put down the phone demands discipline.

> [k2500] That's how social media robs of us of the moments that could
> counterbalance our burnout. It distances us from actual experiences as we
> obsess over documenting them. It turns us into needless multitaskers.

> [k2512] I want to never think of Instagram again, yet feel a deep
> mournfulness for what I'd lose if I were to abandon it. It's an
> unrewarding part-time job that's also my only connection to friends I've
> become too busy to spend actual time with.
