TITLE: The Holly
REPLACED: > [k353] Northeast Park Hill, which had been about 98 percent white in 1960, would be about 90 percent Black by decade's end.
WITH: > [k353] Northeast Park Hill, which had been about 98 percent white in 1960, would be about 90 percent Black by decade's end. Its schools were already badly overcrowded, and its unemployment rate was significantly higher than the city's as a whole.


TITLE: The Holly
REPLACED: > [k463] His partner, Officer Robert Moravek, called out to Nathan, whose shirt was unbuttoned. Moravek saw the butt of what appeared to be a gun protruding from Nathan's belt. Seconds later, gunshots pierced the night. Alvin, who was on the other side of the shopping center, hustled toward the noise.
WITH: > [k463] His partner, Officer Robert Moravek, called out to Nathan, whose shirt was unbuttoned. Moravek saw the butt of what appeared to be a gun protruding from Nathan's belt. Seconds later, gunshots pierced the night.


TITLE: The Holly
REPLACED: > [k1293] When Ernestine and Clarice arrived, tubes sprouted from Terrance's nose, machines whirred and beeped. He had been hit by just one bullet, a . caliber.
WITH: > [k1293] When Ernestine and Clarice arrived, tubes sprouted from Terrance's nose, machines whirred and beeped. He had been hit by just one bullet, a . caliber. It had entered the right center of his back at an angle, missing his spine by a centimeter. It traveled into his spleen, which ruptured, and then into his gut, shredding his upper and lower intestines and cracking his pelvic bone. Doctors were able to remove the shell.


TITLE: The Holly
REPLACED: > [k2172] His fervor to help the community was also about healing himself. Privately he struggled with memories of the destruction he'd wrought
WITH: > [k2172] His fervor to help the community was also about healing himself. Privately he struggled with memories of the destruction he'd wrought and the trauma he'd witnessed.


TITLE: The Holly
REPLACED: > [k5410] Marshal asked Alma Staub, the assistant district attorney, to drop the gun charge. The jury had just found that Terrance had used the weapon to lawfully defend his life. Staub agreed.
WITH: > [k5410] Marshal asked Alma Staub, the assistant district attorney, to drop the gun charge. The jury had just found that Terrance had used the weapon to lawfully defend his life. Staub agreed. Judge Whitney banged his gavel. "You're free to go," he announced to Terrance. "Justice!" someone yelled.


TITLE: The Holly
REPLACED: > [k5493] TERRANCE --WHO IN 2016 became the father of his seventh child, Divinity--was determined to get into the real estate business. He found a patron willing to loan him money for his training and certifications to become a home inspector. The first time Terrance called me from a rooftop, he was giddy like a kid.
WITH: > [k5493] TERRANCE --WHO IN 2016 became the father of his seventh child, Divinity--was determined to get into the real estate business. He found a patron willing to loan him money for his training and certifications to become a home inspector. The first time Terrance called me from a rooftop, he was giddy like a kid. He had built his own website, bought his own tools, and had a phone app to take photos and make his reports. It was impressive. But business was slow. Some people continued to fear being around him because they believed his life was in danger. And key referral sites such as Home Advisor wouldn't allow his business to be listed due to his criminal record.


TITLE: The Holly
TRIMMED: [k415]  for jaywalking
FROM: > [k415] In 1967, due to the heavy police presence at the Dahlia, Denver's African American youth relocated their regular gathering spot to the Holly.

FIXME
> [k417] On Saturday, July 29, as a city-sponsored free youth dance let out, a young Black man was ticketed and arrested in front of his friends, for jaywalking

TITLE: The Holly
TRIMMED: [k488]  Some
FROM: > [k488] NORTHEAST DENVER REMAINED in a perpetual state of emergency for the remainder of the summer. Firebombings of houses, stores, and churches became so common that the fire department couldn't keep up with the calls. Some

TITLE: The Holly
TRIMMED: [k833]  or stealing
FROM: > [k833] dangerous Chinese stars, or stealing

TITLE: The Holly
TRIMMED: [k1339]  Executives
FROM: > [k1339] Rev Kelly, the city's most prominent anti-gang activist, was flooded with invitations to corporate events and fundraisers. He attended in purple zoot suits and alligator hats, talking in his soothing bass voice about a world many in Denver had never imagined. "He's charismatic," Jean Galloway, a Denver socialite and vice president for community relations for 9News, the city's leading news station, said. "He can walk into a room and just cover it. It's not just his physical presence; it's his personality. He knows of what he speaks. Let's face it. He makes good TV." Executives

TITLE: The Holly
TRIMMED: [k2998]  He
FROM: > [k2998] Terrance was also experiencing friction with Paul Callanan about the grant. He

TITLE: The Holly
TRIMMED: [k3841]  Within
FROM: > [k3841] IN DENVER, THE 1,440 police officers on the city's force are expected to cultivate informants if they want to move up the ladder. Within

TITLE: The Holly
TRIMMED: [k3847]  They
FROM: > [k3847] All informants are paid in cash, disbursed by a district-level manager. They

TITLE: The Holly
TRIMMED: [k5027]  Staub drew the
FROM: > [k5027] view by Grimes's head. Staub drew the

TITLE: The Holly
TRIMMED: [k5441]  Any
FROM: > [k5441] He applied for service, sales, and construction jobs and got several interviews, only to fail the background check. The shooting of Hasan remained on his public record despite his acquittal. Any

TITLE: The Holly
TRIMMED: [k5507]  IN
FROM: > [k5507] Seeing himself as a whistleblower, Terrance created a new nickname for himself, T Rob Tha Realest, and he began to sign all his Facebook posts with it because, he wrote, some posts that he had not authored and didn't agree with had begun appearing under his name in comment threads. Then, one day, his page completely disappeared. He was unable to get a response from Facebook. His political platform, along with all his personal photos and videos, and five thousand supporters, was gone. IN

---
layout: post
title: "BookNotes: The Holly"
date: 2022-02-20T21:00:00Z
---
By Julian Rubinstein, Some Publisher, Month 1, 201x, ISBN

> [k327] The people Ernestine cooked for helped with the down payment and
> connected her with a bank. She was approved for a thirty-year mortgage,
> at $112 per month. At twenty-four years old, a grandchild of slaves,
> Ernestine was a Denver homeowner.

> [k353] Northeast Park Hill, which had been about 98 percent white in
> 1960, would be about 90 percent Black by decade's end. Its schools were
> already badly overcrowded, and its unemployment rate was significantly
> higher than the city's as a whole.

> [k383] Denver also won a War on Poverty grant, which Currigan directed
> toward a jobs initiative. As the summer of 1967 began, a mobile
> job-placement office rolled into the Dahlia Shopping Center parking lot.

> [k415] In 1967, due to the heavy police presence at the Dahlia, Denver's
> African American youth relocated their regular gathering spot to the
> Holly.
>
> FIXME
> > [k417] On Saturday, July 29, as a city-sponsored free youth dance let
> out, a young Black man was ticketed and arrested in front of his friends,

> [k442] More than one hundred American cities saw rioting in the summer of
> 1967. Denver was not among them. In November, Currigan was reelected.
> Among his first acts was to ask for the resignation of his police chief.

> [k453] The evening of June 24, 1968, was cool and clear. Hundreds of
> young men and women were gathered in the Holly Shopping Center parking
> lot, their elongated figures silhouetted by the moon.

> [k458] When other friends pulled up in a car and flashed a fake gun,
> Nathan thought it was hilarious and grabbed it.

> [k463] His partner, Officer Robert Moravek, called out to Nathan, whose
> shirt was unbuttoned. Moravek saw the butt of what appeared to be a gun
> protruding from Nathan's belt. Seconds later, gunshots pierced the night.

> [k481] Chief Seaton assembled the media. "He [Nathan] raised the tail of
> his shirt with his left hand, drew the pistol with his right hand and
> fired at Moravek all in one motion," Seaton told Denver's press corps.
> Officer Moravek, according to Seaton, was recovering.

> [k488] NORTHEAST DENVER REMAINED in a perpetual state of emergency for
> the remainder of the summer. Firebombings of houses, stores, and churches
> became so common that the fire department couldn't keep up with the
> calls.

> [k530] Watson was arrested nearly two dozen times over the next year, so
> often that his apparent persecution became the subject of America's first
> televised trial documentary, which aired on PBS. The program concerned
> charges stemming from an incident on November 6, 1968, the morning after
> Richard Nixon was elected. Watson had stepped outside, and a District 2
> cop he knew greeted him by saying, "White power." When Watson got in his
> car, the cop followed him. A white lawyer, Leonard Davies, had become
> Watson's personal attorney, and Watson pulled into a 7-Eleven to call
> him, but police entered the store and arrested him for resisting arrest.
> At trial, Watson was acquitted in less than two hours.

> [k538] Being an activist, at least for Watson, meant being a target.

> [k629] And media coverage of Watson's disagreements with the city council
> president Elvin Caldwell and over the direction of Model Cities did not
> help his reputation with whites in Denver. For a while, Watson found work
> as a bar bouncer and at a record store. Eventually, he resorted to
> selling drugs.
>
> FIXME
> > [k631] The city of Denver as a whole entered an era of employment
> growth in the 1970s that outpaced all American cities but Houston. Thanks
> to the city's U.S. mint, the Air Force base, and growing regional federal
> law enforcement offices, Denver had more federal employees than any city
> but Washington.

> [k668] "Park Hill Pride" was a mantra many in Denver had heard. A 1974
> study commissioned by the Colorado Civil Rights Commission, "The Park
> Hill Experience," described the neighborhood as "one of the few, perhaps
> the only, ethnically and economically diverse 'stable' communities in the
> United States." The false narrative of the community's successful
> integration continued. South Park Hill remained a wealthy, mostly white
> neighborhood. Northeast Park Hill was neither diverse nor economically
> stable, but despite this, its pride was something to behold. In the
> 1960s, the neighborhood was home to Pam Grier, who in 1974 became the
> iconic justice avenger Foxy Brown, star of the eponymous blaxploitation
> film. Many, including Ernestine, kept their lawns meticulously groomed,
> and bushes and trees shaped.

> [k688] From that point, Terrance was accepted as part of the group. A
> couple dozen kids his age lived in and around the Red Bricks. Most of
> them had single, working mothers, including the three Alexander brothers.
> Isaac, the oldest, was one of the neighborhood's toughest and cockiest
> kids. When the snow fell heavily, they gathered at Chauncey Billups's
> house on 29th and Poplar, around the corner from Ernestine's place.

> [k755] Anger was a problem in northeast Denver. Lauren Watson, who had
> been arrested thirty-three times without a conviction, frequently quoted
> James Baldwin, who said that "to be a Negro in this country and to be
> relatively conscious is to be in a rage almost all of the time."

> [k833] dangerous Chinese stars,

> [k863] By 1983, Ross was becoming the biggest drug dealer in South LA,
> selling around one million dollars' worth of rock every day. He became a
> hero in his neighborhood, where he put up the money to build basketball
> courts and sponsored a community Easter egg hunt.

> [k892] In 1985, Asberry, Jefferson, and Jones, along with another LA
> transplant, Matthew Vick, decided they were going to start Denver's first
> Crip gang.

> [k941] Crack was big business, and not just for the dealers. The U.S.
> government had declared a "war" on drugs. To fight it, thousands of new
> law enforcement jobs were funded.

> [k997] ON JUNE 25, 1988, two months after N.W.A's sold-out show at
> Denver's McNichols Arena, Michael Asberry led a dangerous mission into
> Northeast Park Hill. The incursion would finally launch Denver into the
> war for which Los Angeles had created the mold.

> [k1293] When Ernestine and Clarice arrived, tubes sprouted from
> Terrance's nose, machines whirred and beeped. He had been hit by just one
> bullet, a . caliber. It had entered the right center of his back at an
> angle, missing his spine by a centimeter. It traveled into his spleen,
> which ruptured, and then into his gut, shredding his upper and lower
> intestines and cracking his pelvic bone. Doctors were able to remove the
> shell.

> [k1299] Suzanne was living in a drug treatment facility, a condition of a
> drug court conviction. For her, seeing Terrance laid out from a shooting
> triggered the anger she'd turned to drugs to escape.
>
> FIXME
> > [k1301] George was in the midst of a crime spree with two prostitute
> friends somewhere in Kansas when he got word. He drove straight back. He
> hadn't seen his son since Terrance had been put on the Bloods, but he
> knew all about ShowBizz. Everyone knew about ShowBizz. George was proud
> of his son.

> [k1321] Terrance had just earned a big stripe. He'd been shot for the
> Holly. Now he was a Gangster with a capital G, a real one.

> [k1339] Rev Kelly, the city's most prominent anti-gang activist, was
> flooded with invitations to corporate events and fundraisers. He attended
> in purple zoot suits and alligator hats, talking in his soothing bass
> voice about a world many in Denver had never imagined. "He's
> charismatic," Jean Galloway, a Denver socialite and vice president for
> community relations for 9News, the city's leading news station, said. "He
> can walk into a room and just cover it. It's not just his physical
> presence; it's his personality. He knows of what he speaks. Let's face
> it. He makes good TV."

> [k1357] Ernestine put a shotgun behind the counter at the restaurant.
> When Mayor Webb arrived, he had an aide enter first and check the
> bathrooms. The restaurant was so ensconced in Bloods territory that a new
> Bloods set, called the Deuce Nine Family Bloods, named themselves for its
> corner, at 29th and Fairfax. They were one of six Bloods sets that
> followed the Crenshaw Mafia Gangers Bloods in Park Hill.

> [k1363] "A battle over the Holly: It's Residents vs. Drug Dealers for
> Control," read a front-page headline in the Post. A photograph depicted a
> young Blood
> FIXME

> [k1379] Tupac, who befriended both Crips and Bloods, said he felt
> obligated to talk about the violence. "What we're doing is using our
> brain to get out of the ghetto any way we can," Tupac said. "So we tell
> these stories. And they tend to be violent because our world tends to be
> filled with violence."

> [k1419] He bought a ' Impala with a maroon interior, like the one Eazy-E
> sang about in "Boyz-n-the-Hood." He got silver Dayton wheel rims for it.
> When Clarice rode around the neighborhood with Terry, as she called him,
> she felt like royalty.

> [k1422] Life with ShowBizz also had its downside. His Impala didn't last
> long; the Crips dropped large rocks through his windshield and shot it up
> twice, once when Terrance and Lizard were in it, leading to a shootout.
> Clarice waited each night for Terrance at the Driftwood, hoping he would
> return.

> [k1468] Terrance denied it, but this time the judge set his bond at
> $250,000, annotating in longhand on the order, "suspect in many other
> cases involving guns and shootings."
>
> FIXME
> > [k1470] A man peered at Terrance from behind his desk, right down to
> his red Converse shoes. Somehow Terrance had managed not to give them up
> on intake. "Do you know who I am?" the man asked. "Yes, sir," Terrance
> said. Terrance had never met his grandfather, Sheriff "Big John" Sanford,
> but he knew about him. He was George's father. George hadn't even met him
> until he was sixteen. Big John had known that one day Terrance would show
> up.

> [k1494] IN FEBRUARY 1995, Ernestine visited with news: Terrance was a
> father. He was eighteen.

> [k1497] Another day, Terrance was summoned to a room in the
> administrative wing. Big John was there, as were his mother and father,
> both in jail jumpsuits. Terrance couldn't remember when he'd last seen
> his mom. He'd fallen out with his father about a year earlier, when
> George admitted selling one of Terrance's best machine guns for $50; it
> was worth about $750. George had been desperate to score. Big John asked
> if they had anything to say to one another. They didn't.

> [k1516] George went to the front. Pastor Emerson held out his hand. "Man
> of God, you're bound by crack cocaine and God's about to deliver you."
> "Who's telling you my business?" George said. "Brother, don't fear. God's
> about to deliver you." Emerson turned to face the congregation.
> "Everybody who's been delivered from drugs, stand up." George watched as
> about a dozen people stood.

> [k1524] AFTERWARD, GEORGE HAD no craving for the drug. He went to the
> church every day. His life was in God's hands, he believed.

> [k1527] One night, a female jail guard who knew George came by his cell.
> "Roberts, you're not allowed to have a hardback in here," Officer Tracy
> Jones said. She noticed he was looking at the book strangely. "Roberts,
> do you know how to read?" "No, ma'am," George said. Jones taught George
> to read each night after her rounds. The first thing he learned was
> Ezekiel 37.
>
> FIXME
> > [k1530] Letter by letter he sounded it out, until he heard God's voice.

> [k2040] Terrance could see that it was the younger guys in front, as
> usual. The older guys used them like pawns. Terrance went straight
> between the two sides and called out to the OGs in the back. "If you all
> want to fight," Terrance said, "why don't you just fight me?"
>
> FIXME
> > [k2044] The following day Terrance was called in to his caseworker's
> office and asked about the incident. He explained what happened but was
> told that a decision by the warden had already been made. If he was able
> to stop a riot, he says he was told, he could also be able to start one.
> He was transferred to another facility.

> [k2070] TERRANCE APPLIED FOR and was accepted into a leadership course at
> the Community Resource Center, an established Denver organization that
> fostered nonprofits. Most of the students were middle-aged, well-off
> white women for whom Terrance was something of a novelty. The ornately
> tattooed ex-con was handsome, humble, and well-spoken, with a
> southern-inflected accent they didn't recognize. "I'm just here to learn,
> y'all," he said. He kept his ankle bracelet hidden beneath his pants.
> They told him they had no idea there were gangs in Denver. After his
> presentation, one of his classmates wrote him a check.

> [k2123] "Prodigal Son Leaves Jail, Starts Nonprofit for Kids," read the
> headline in the Rocky Mountain News on February 6, 2006.

> [k2172] His fervor to help the community was also about healing himself.
> Privately he struggled with memories of the destruction he'd wrought and
> the trauma he'd witnessed.

> [k2373] "Y'all need to read some of these articles and blogs--what people
> saying about East Denver African Americans," Terrance continued. "They're
> saying we're nothing but a bunch of crackheads ... Talking about we're
> stupid, we're illiterate, thank God for gentrification now that people
> are taking the properties. Them are some nice brick houses on the Five
> Points and Park Hill." He paused. "But: we want to kill each other." The
> room clamored and cheered. "You're my people," Terrance said. "I love
> y'all." He added, "If you need something to do with your children, give
> me a call and we'll work it out. I just don't want to see nobody else get
> killed."

> [k2435] Opportunity, Terrance knew, was the biggest threat to the Park
> Hill Bloods.

> [k2441] ON DECEMBER 17, after a seven-month grand jury investigation,
> nine members of the Crips--"the Holly 9," the media would dub them--were
> indicted on conspiracy and arson charges for burning down the shopping
> center. The motive, according to district attorney Mitch Morrissey, was
> retaliation for the murder of Michael Asberry. "That is one of the older
> shopping centers," Morrissey said at a press conference. "It is kind of
> the heart there, with the police station down the street ... It is our
> theory that they were targeting the shopping center. I don't think they
> really cared much about the businesses. The statement they were trying to
> make was to the Holly itself. I think it was an attack on the community."

> [k2449] As the charges against the Holly 9 were announced, the American
> Planning Association, the country's largest urban planning group, named
> Park Hill one of America's " Great Neighborhoods." The citation, heralded
> by the Denver media, noted Park Hill's "tolerance and openness toward
> others" and its "progressive integration, diversity and memorable
> character." No mention was made of the burned-out shopping center and
> erstwhile home of the Bloods that no one could afford to clean up.

> [k2494] With funding lined up, Miripol offered Bullock $650,000 for the
> Holly, about half of what Bullock had paid for it. It was a terrible
> offer. Johnny Copeland had paid twice as much in 1983. But Bullock's
> hands were tied. The City of Denver had its preferred buyer, and with the
> center lying in ruins, it could declare the site blighted at any moment,
> invoke eminent domain, and seize the property. Bullock accepted the
> offer. "Shopping Center to Face Wrecking Ball, Renewal," read a Denver
> Post headline on April 23, 2009.

> [k2520] After 150 years of publication, the Rocky Mountain News had shut
> its doors three months earlier. The paper's newsroom, once a downtown
> landmark, was purchased by the City of Denver, and quickly leveled. Steel
> and other building materials were repurposed for use in the construction
> of the $376 million Denver Justice Center--comprising a new jail
> connected by an underground tunnel to a thirty-eight-room courthouse--set
> to open the following year.

> [k2604] Across America, as gang membership rose, it was common for young
> gang members to be second generation, born into a war the country barely
> acknowledged.

> [k2812] Denver's gang homicides in 2010 fell to an all-time low,
> officially only ten. The city had never seen so dramatic a downturn.
> While law enforcement efforts were also on the rise, many in northeast
> Denver credited the Camo Movement for affecting the attitudes of the
> youth.

> [k2823] TERRANCE HAD HELPED stem Denver's gang violence at a time when
> most of America's gang communities were seeing an increase in gang
> activity. According to the FBI, between 2009 and 2011, gang membership
> soared by 40 percent.

> [k2827] Suburban areas, where gangs had not been as prevalent, saw more
> gang activity.

> [k2906] Hancock and White would make
> FIXME

> [k2904] AFTER A NATIONWIDE search, Hancock hired Robert White, the former
> Louisville, Kentucky, police chief. White became the first person in
> fifty years from outside Denver's police department to lead it. Hancock
> and White would make a formidable partnership. Both Black and from gang
> communities (White grew up in Washington, D.C.), they were going to have
> the chance to helm a closely watched federal anti-gang effort: Denver had
> just been awarded another prestigious Project Safe Neighborhoods grant.

> [k2921] Slutkin's program, now called Cure Violence, used former gang
> members with street credibility to interrupt conflicts before they
> happened. The parties involved would then be brought into meetings with
> social workers and law enforcement in hopes of steering them onto a
> different path.

> [k2989] He composed an email to Patrick Horvath of the Denver Foundation,
> which Terrance had learned was responsible for leaving him off the
> announcement program. "I feel that I am strategically being alienated
> because of the advocacy that my community asked of me to perform," he
> wrote.

> [k2998] Terrance was also experiencing friction with Paul Callanan about
> the grant.

> [k3008] In addition, once a month they were expected to discuss their
> cases during an Intervention Support Group meeting, with law enforcement
> present.

> [k3014] CHIEF WHITE OF the Denver PD had not met Terrance, but his
> presence was virtually impossible to miss. After Trayvon Martin was
> killed in February 2012, Terrance had co-led a march to the state
> capitol. And word had gotten around that, at a recent GRID meeting,
> Terrance brought the conversation to a halt when someone asked what he,
> Bryan, and Qwest knew about some gang members recently released from
> prison. "We're not participating in this kind of word-on-the-street
> discussion," Terrance said. He got up and left.

> [k3037] Terrance received a certificate of honor from Congresswoman
> Maxine Waters, and he returned to Denver determined to test his resolve.
> Gang violence in northeast Denver had begun rising again.

> [k3041] Hollis, president of the Black Police Officers Association and a
> single mother, was hit in the head and killed. Her death made national
> news and put a rare spotlight on Denver's gang problem. "There aren't a
> lot of skiers and snowboarders in northeast Denver," Terrance told The
> New York Times. "We're talking about young men here who feel like they
> don't have any choices."

> [k3114] With home prices rising, many longtime Northeast Park Hill
> residents decided to sell. Among them was Ernestine. After fifty-three
> years in her home, she put it on the market, accepting an offer for
> $117,000. Four months later, after a renovation, it sold again for
> $301,000.

> [k3398] "You guys supposed to be YG active Bloods?" Terrance said. "When
> I was YG active we never let somebody we thought was a snitch come in the
> Holly. You know what we'd do? We'd kill 'em."
>
> FIXME
> > [k3401] HOURS LATER, HASAN Jones lay on the ground, unconscious.

> [k3412] The outlook for Terrance's case seemed bleak. Terrance was
> arguing self-defense, but the Denver media was full of details that were
> hard to square with a self-defense claim.

> [k3427] Terrance said that it was the city's failure to protect
> low-income African Americans in northeast Denver that had made him become
> strident in his criticism of the city's gentrification.
>
> FIXME
> > [k3428] In 2012, the city council had moved quickly to declare eminent
> domain over a section of Five Points, he said, so that there was no time
> to organize opposition. "It's already done," he said of Five Points,
> calling it "the most gentrified black community in America."

> [k3477] As we rode north through Park Hill, the neighborhood's renowned
> nineteenth-century Tudor homes, wide boulevards, and large trees
> disappeared as we crossed MLK Boulevard into Northeast Park Hill.

> [k3485] The city had joined the Urban Land Conservancy in asking Mrs.
> Wilson to sell the strip, but she refused. Instead, she renamed it the
> Park Hill Center and put in a new green-and-white sign that stood in a
> patch of brown grass that ran along the front of the shops.

> [k3555] Rev's building was accessed by a massive garage door that clanked
> open. Inside, elementary and middle school youths chased one another
> around a cavernous space. Rev, who wore jeans and an Open Door V-neck
> shirt, had dreadlocks and the physique of an NBA basketball player.

> [k3572] "I feel like Moses in his latter years," Rev told me, referring
> to the path he had forged in Denver's anti-gang effort. He said he
> thought Terrance was going to be "my Joshua," referring to the biblical
> figure God chose to lead Israel after Moses's death.

> [k3587] George now lived in a 1940s housing project in the middle of Five
> Points. The seven buildings, each two stories high, were a nest of
> Crip-affiliated families in the middle of Denver's most rapidly
> gentrifying neighborhood. Bullet holes pocked George's front door, while
> across the street, condominiums under construction were listed for more
> than half a million dollars apiece.

> [k3599] It was impossible to accompany George anywhere in northeast
> Denver without people calling out, "Pastor George." Though he was
> surrounded by death and mourning, he was possibly the most optimistic
> person I'd ever encountered.

> [k3841] IN DENVER, THE 1,440 police officers on the city's force are
> expected to cultivate informants if they want to move up the ladder.

> [k3847] All informants are paid in cash, disbursed by a district-level
> manager.

> [k3863] Nationally, informants were the leading cause of wrongful
> convictions in capital cases. Terrance and others I would soon meet
> believed they were also enlisted by law enforcement to undermine and
> intimidate activists.

> [k3873] All of them told me there was only one person who had been
> willing to speak out about informants. It was Terrance. Doing so, they
> said, had both distinguished him and quite possibly placed him in danger.

> [k3893] Denver law enforcement's record of illegal spying was not
> reassuring. Denver's FBI had illegally conducted surveillance on the
> Occupy movement in 2011, a year after the birth of the Camo Movement. And
> in 2002, Denver's "Spy Files" case was a scandal at the end of mayor
> Wellington Webb's administration, revealing that the Denver police had
> been conducting illegal surveillance on peaceful activists, including a
> police watchdog group that Denver police categorized as "criminal
> extremists."

> [k3987] According to Terrance, Hasan had killed the two-year-old niece of
> Pernell Hines, one of the top Blood OGs. "It's all over town," Terrance
> told me. It hadn't been in the media, though, and I couldn't find Hasan
> listed as an inmate anywhere in Colorado.

> [k3994] But no other charges were attached to him. I would later learn
> that, in the three years prior to being shot by Terrance, Hasan had been
> arrested nearly two dozen times, including for child abuse, two drug
> possessions, and four assaults, none of which resulted in formal charges.

> [k3992] I finally found Hasan listed as an inmate not in Aurora's
> Arapahoe County, where Ny Ny died, but in the Denver County Jail. He was
> facing attempted murder charges for a drive-by shooting that had occurred
> blocks from the Holly on May 30, just before the concrete barriers were
> installed. But no other charges were attached to him. I would later learn
> that, in the three years prior to being shot by Terrance, Hasan had been
> arrested nearly two dozen times, including for child abuse, two drug
> possessions, and four assaults, none of which resulted in formal charges.

> [k4055] Ferguson, which had a strong Blood gang presence, exploded in
> protests that spread to other cities, as people marched and chanted,
> "Hands Up, Don't Shoot."
>
> FIXME
> > [k4057] Terrance showed me the Facebook page of Deandre Joshua, whose
> brother had witnessed Michael Brown's shooting and who had been part of
> the protests. Joshua was found dead in a burning car. He had been shot in
> the head. Some in Ferguson believed that he had been targeted because of
> his activism.

> [k4339] It wasn't clear to me yet what was going on in Denver, and the
> local reporting didn't offer any insight. I was also surprised that while
> nearly every local news outlet covered the emergency meeting, not a
> single story mentioned the meeting-stopping dispute between the city's
> two most prominent anti-gang activists over whether one knew the other
> had been attacked.

> [k4358] I did, however, find the DOJ-funded quarterly magazine National
> Gang Center, which devoted the bulk of its Spring 2015 issue to Denver.
> "Planning for Successful Summer Programs" was the headline. In 2014, a
> community-led campaign dubbed "Safe Summer, Safe Holly" ensured a
> violence-free summer where children could learn, grow and play ... During
> the 90-day period, not a single act of violence was reported ... Based on
> this success, there are more plans for redevelopment in the area and,
> more important, a sense of pride among community residents.

> [k4366] I didn't recognize what I was reading. The summer of 2014 in the
> Holly had been marred by a spike in gang shootings that caused the city
> to block the main road through the Holly with concrete barricades,
> sparking community outrage. The Denver police's own publicly available
> statistics recorded fourteen violent crimes in Northeast Park Hill
> between June 1 and August 31, the reporting period.

> [k4572] She said she became close with several "original" Bloods when she
> met Isaac, or Ice, at school. They were seventeen. But she said people
> didn't realize that she had stopped dating Isaac by the time she got
> pregnant with Hasan. She said that Hasan's biological father was another
> OG Blood. Neither man was in Hasan's life growing up.

> [k5027] view by Grimes's head.

> [k5088] Johnston, who wore a suit, testified that he had a dual role as
> both the elected state representative for northeast Denver and the head
> of a nonprofit organization that offered summer internships for college
> students on issues of social justice. This was something I'd heard about
> many times from Terrance. Terrance said it was one of the reasons he had
> fallen out with Mike. According to Terrance, for a few weeks each summer
> a group of Ivy League students took over the office and treated him like
> he was their busboy, leaving plates and garbage around that he had to
> clean up. Terrance had also told me that part of the reason he started
> calling his office the Park Hill Community Center was because Mike had
> asked him what he thought of calling the building the Mike Johnston
> Community Center. Terrance said he'd told Johnston he didn't like it.

> [k5405] He declared Terrance not guilty--on both the attempted murder and
> assault charges. Terrance, who looked straight ahead, wiped his eyes.

> [k5410] Marshal asked Alma Staub, the assistant district attorney, to
> drop the gun charge. The jury had just found that Terrance had used the
> weapon to lawfully defend his life. Staub agreed. Judge Whitney banged
> his gavel. "You're free to go," he announced to Terrance. "Justice!"
> someone yelled.

> [k5420] To me, the shock was seeing Terrance walk without any prison time
> for possessing the gun. Perhaps Terrance's increasingly obvious community
> support, and potential questions about the way the case was investigated,
> helped the DA's office decide for the first time to back down. Anti-gang
> work, they knew, was dangerous. The two-years-long ordeal resulted in no
> convictions (excepting Hasan's for contempt) and was a high-profile loss
> for the DA's office. The public defender's office threw a party for
> Marshal and Lisa.

> [k5437] A local TV reporter got a jailhouse interview with Hasan after
> the verdict. Hasan said he regretted not testifying and that he planned
> to sue Terrance. When asked if he thought Terrance would be safe in the
> neighborhood, Hasan said, "I don't think so."

> [k5441] He applied for service, sales, and construction jobs and got
> several interviews, only to fail the background check. The shooting of
> Hasan remained on his public record despite his acquittal.

> [k5448] Regarding Terrance, the Post's story stated that the city had
> recently "learned a hard lesson when it trusted a reformed gang member to
> help Park Hill."
>
> FIXME
> > [k5450] If the city had learned anything from trusting Terrance to help
> Park Hill, it was not evident to anyone in the community who wanted to
> defeat gang violence. "The Denver Post Needs 2 go away and die," Gerald
> wrote on Facebook. The year ended with fifty-four homicides, a majority
> of them gang related, most unsolved. It was a 75 percent rise, and the
> most in nine years.

> [k5488] Changes were coming quickly across northeast Denver. The city
> used a "nuisance abatement" law that enabled it to seize properties for
> which complaints had been filed. In 2018, one of those places, the Platte
> Valley Projects, where George Roberts lived, was slated to be mostly
> demolished. George was given three weeks to move. He accepted relocation
> to a building on the I-70 corridor, in the most polluted zip code in the
> country.

> [k5493] TERRANCE --WHO IN 2016 became the father of his seventh child,
> Divinity--was determined to get into the real estate business. He found a
> patron willing to loan him money for his training and certifications to
> become a home inspector. The first time Terrance called me from a
> rooftop, he was giddy like a kid. He had built his own website, bought
> his own tools, and had a phone app to take photos and make his reports.
> It was impressive. But business was slow. Some people continued to fear
> being around him because they believed his life was in danger. And key
> referral sites such as Home Advisor wouldn't allow his business to be
> listed due to his criminal record.

> [k5507] Seeing himself as a whistleblower, Terrance created a new
> nickname for himself, T Rob Tha Realest, and he began to sign all his
> Facebook posts with it because, he wrote, some posts that he had not
> authored and didn't agree with had begun appearing under his name in
> comment threads. Then, one day, his page completely disappeared. He was
> unable to get a response from Facebook. His political platform, along
> with all his personal photos and videos, and five thousand supporters,
> was gone.

> [k5520] In 2017, leaked FBI documents revealed that as the Ferguson
> protests grew, the FBI had begun tracking activists. Methods included the
> use of informants as well as Geofeedia, a social media location tool
> funded in part by the CIA. The Black activists who the Department of
> Justice were concerned about had been given a designation, Black Identity
> Extremist. It applied to African Americans whose views the DOJ believed
> made them a threat. During a November 2017 House Judiciary Committee
> oversight hearing, then attorney general Jeff Sessions was asked whether
> Black Lives Matter was considered to be a Black Identity Extremist group.
> "I'm not able to comment on that," Sessions said.

> [k5629] Terrance got in touch with Elijah's family, and soon he and
> another activist, Candice Bailey, were organizing rallies at the Aurora
> police headquarters, demanding the release of the police body cam
> footage, and that the four officers be charged with Elijah's murder. At
> the rallies, Terrance wore a full ski mask over his head and paced in
> front of teams of officers in SWAT gear. "It's okay to wear a ski mask on
> your face," he raged at them. "If I am breaking the law, right now, I am
> saying the Aurora police should come across the barricade and do me like
> they did Elijah. But they won't!" "You can't teach that kind of talent,"
> H-Soul told me. "That's what makes the white racist establishment so
> afraid of Terrance, because you can't defeat that kind of courage.
> There's a lot of ShowBizz inside of T Rob, just like there was a lot of
> Detroit Red inside of Malcolm X."

> [k5649] Terrance, who was leading marches about twice a week, led
> hundreds through Five Points one day. "Liar, Liar, Gentrifier," he had
> everyone chanting. "I don't even want to be called an activist," he told
> me. He said he believed "activism" in Denver was limited to causes the
> city and its most powerful foundations and allies approved. "Call me a
> revolutionary or don't call me nothin'," he said.

> [k5654] Before the House vote, Herod thanked only two people by name:
> Terrance and Candice. After the bill's signing, Terrance was among the
> speakers at the capitol. Colorado was the first state in the nation to
> pass police reform following the killing of George Floyd.

> [k5661] The media didn't seem to know what to make of Terrance. Few of
> the stories mentioned anything about his past. His life had indeed
> entered a new phase. He finally had landed his first real job. He was in
> charge of all the local home inspectors for Zillow, which was betting big
> on Denver's real estate and making cash offers for homes. Terrance was
> able to get a small one-bedroom apartment in south Denver, where he
> hosted his kids for sleepovers every weekend.
>
> FIXME
> > [k5666] He spent what seemed like every other waking hour organizing.
> He and others co-founded the Frontline Party for Revolutionary Action,
> FPRA, which became one of the biggest protest forces in the Denver area,
> drawing thousands to its rallies. In a matter of two months, the Justice
> for Elijah McClain movement became one of the biggest in the nation.
> Celebrities flew in for events. The Change.org petition asking for the
> arrests of the police officers registered nearly six million signatures.
> Terrance's face, looking out from behind a mask that read "I can't
> breathe," appeared on news sites around the country.

> [k5671] As Terrance became one of the most prominent Black Lives Matter
> organizers in Denver, he also faced some familiar challenges. Two gang
> members he hadn't heard from in years began posting on his Facebook page
> that he was an informant. Terrance in turn posted photos of court
> documents he argued showed that they were actually the ones with ties to
> the police. The men's intimidation stopped.

> [k5690] In Aurora, undercover police were among those at the Elijah
> McClain rallies. After one rally, sponsored by Terrance's organization,
> the Aurora mayor, in a tweet he later deleted, referred to the organizers
> as "domestic terrorists."

> [k5699] Terrance believed that many of the city's most dangerous men were
> being protected by law enforcement. Ice, he believed, was one of them. In
> 2016, Ice had charges for DUI, drug possession, and illegal weapons
> possession dismissed. For two domestic violence assaults in 2018, he
> received probation, which he had violated at least twice.

> [k5734] Two prominent Denver civil rights lawyers who were interested in
> drafting a law creating oversight and accountability for the use of
> informants began to speak to Terrance, and me. Terrance had begun talking
> about what he called the "urban war industrial complex," an industry that
> had brought millions of dollars to Denver's law enforcement. The misuse
> of informants was a critical piece of it, and the more he educated people
> in his community about it, the more they agreed it needed to be
> addressed.

> [k5743] AROUND LUNCHTIME ON Thursday September 17, 2020, Terrance was
> going for a walk in a Denver park when several police cars pulled onto
> the grass. He was told to put his hands in the air. He was arrested as
> part of a sweep that included five other Denver protest leaders who were
> members of the Party for Socialism and Liberation, which had joined
> forces with Terrance's party for the Justice for Elijah McClain protests.
> At forty-four, Terrance was the oldest of the arrestees. He called me
> from jail. He said that one of the Denver police officers who arrested
> him told him that they had been following him "for weeks." George told me
> a cop who'd visited him at home had told him the same. Terrance's charges
> stemmed from two Elijah McClain rallies that took place months earlier.
> They included a felony count of "inciting a riot," and six misdemeanors.
